Can you talk a little bit about the work you've been doing with the Trust this year? Because
of Covid, it's sort of developed, hasn't it, before we went into our latest lockdown of course, but
your Tuesday gatherings for example? Our Tuesday groups are really the practical fieldwork groups,
which are trying to find evidential remains of long period of occupation here.
The original sites that we've chosen to do this for one reason or another were not available to us,
and we've been very lucky to build a relationship with the landowners at Oppenheim here,
right up at the head of the valley, where there is huge amounts of evidence to be interpreted.
We were lucky there, because much of the land has largely escaped modern agricultural practice,
which was to deep plough, improve, fertilise, develop the grassland or crop land in some areas.
But by doing deep cultivation like that, any surface remains are ploughed out.
And we are lucky then, as I said, we have been able to find remains of boundaries, farmsteads,
which would certainly date back to medieval times and the time of the Abbey.
So that's a great excitement. So we're looking at long hot sites, so we're looking at
low banks, which indicate very early field systems. And our colleague Julian
Ravist is very accomplished with the drone surveys, which have revealed huge amounts of
um, deep landscape features, which you don't necessarily see at ground level.
The ideal time for doing the sort of work we're doing actually is in the winter,
because the bracken is gone, and the sun is at a low angle in the sky, and it will illuminate
the surface in a very different way. It's been fantastic how it's in the snow over the last few
days, but the snow too is revealing shadow patterns, which indicate relatively low
features in the landscape, which you don't see by eye as you're just moving around.
But just jump out at you. So yes, there's lots going on there. And within that, we've been able
to engage a lot of interest locally, some from our team or local people, some from further away.
And we're also developing links with
with
an archaeologist, Vic Cardo, who lives over at Nantlas, who's done a lot of work
on the Owen Valley and the Cliovan Valley, and can bring experience, which shows a similar sort
of passion to the uplifts we're finding here, and all sorts of exciting things.
What looks like a deep ditch in the landscape is in fact was a sort of runoff of getting the
sheep up onto the hills, having watered them in the river. One man put the sheep in this rather deep
gully and just drive them straight up to the top of the hill without any other help.
And that's a very interesting farming technique. And at the moment we're looking for
hazel sites and have also the summer farms of the farms lower down in the valley. So we would be up
for relatively short periods, live temporarily on the hill, milk the cattle, cattle are important
in medieval times, make their cheeses, send them back down, and then eventually by early September
maybe back down in the main farm. So yes, lots going on there and still a lot, lot to be found.
We're looking at the moment at some cairns on the top of the Camilla bank, and of course it is
an ancient landscape. You always have to remember that there was somebody in the landscape before
whoever's there now. So when the monks came here there were people before them and before them and
before them. And the Neolithic remains just encircled from here really. If you go up onto the
garn, where you've got to garn, burial mound, there are some what looked like remains of some
burial mounds actually on the Camilla bank and then round onto the Camilla hill. They're just
one after the other because they tended to bury within sight of a previous burial whatever. So
history over thousands of years is revealing itself and the Tuesday group has been fantastic
and they've worked very hard at doing the donkey work associated with the period which is
actually revealing the footings of early farm steps at
Gilemon, Granacterium, which disappeared as a farm back in the 1860s when the land above it was
enclosed. And two sites have come on itself, one where an obvious house was until
probably occupied until about 1880. But just adjacent to that I've got my eye on another
platform site which we haven't done much work on but to measure it. But I think that could be
an earlier and certainly medieval location of a farmstead and it would have been a timber
built house. You wouldn't find any remains of it. But under the surface there is obvious paving
paving, store stones laid down as paving. So what that holds remains to be seen.
There's always something else to find out.